README.md, before:

![Matrix screenshot](/screenshot.png?raw=true "Matrix's default appearance.")

# matrix (web-based green code rain, made with love)

### TL;DR

- [Classic Matrix code](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix)
- [3D mode](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?volumetric=true)
- [Matrix Resurrections code (WIP)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=resurrections)
- [Matrix Resurrections's updated code (WIP)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=updated)
- [Operator Matrix code (with ripple effects)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=operator)
- [Code of the "Nightmare Matrix"](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=nightmare)
  - [(you know, this stuff).](http://matrix.wikia.com/wiki/Nightmare_Matrix)
- [Code of the "Paradise Matrix"](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=paradise)
  - [(AKA this stuff).](http://matrix.wikia.com/wiki/Paradise_Matrix)
- [A custom variety I call "Palimpsest"](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=palimpsest)
- [A custom variety I call "Twilight"](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=twilight)
- [Pride flag colors](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=pride)
- [Trans flag colors](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=trans)
- [Custom stripes (`colors=R,G,B,R,G,B,R,G,B, etc`)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=customStripes&colors=1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,0)
- [Custom image (`url=www.website.com/picture.jpg`)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=image&url=https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f5/EagleRock.jpg)
- [Raw compute texture (`effect=none`) (_epilepsy warning_: lots of flickering)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=none)

- [The free font (TrueType).](https://github.com/Rezmason/matrix/raw/master/assets/Matrix-Code.ttf)
---
### about

This project is a WebGL implementation of the raining green code seen in _The Matrix Trilogy_. It's built right on top of the upcoming graphics API [WebGPU](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb), but falls back to the functional WebGL wrapper, [REGL](https://regl.party); its previous Three.js version is maintained in a separate branch.

---
### goals

The way I see it, there's four kinds of Matrix effects people call ["digital rain"](http://matrix.wikia.com/wiki/Matrix_code):
1. The green symbols that "rain down" operators' screens
2. Scenes from within the simulation that depict green symbols streaking across everything
3. The opening title graphics from *The Matrix*, which combine effect #1 with a "dialing" visualization and some other 3D effects
3. The sequels' opening title graphics, which combine aspects of effects #1 and #2.

While there have been a lot of attempts at #1 and #3, they're all missing important parts of #4 that make digital rain so iconic. Here are the requirements for my implementation:

- **Get the right glyphs**. Like the actual ones. Everyone knows Matrix glyphs are some treatment of [Katakana](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katakana), but they also include a few characters from [Susan Kare's Chicago typeface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicago_(typeface)). The Matrix glyphs in *this* project come from the source: cleaned up vectors [from an old SWF](https://web.archive.org/web/20070914173039/http://www.atari.com:80/thematrixpathofneo/) for an official Matrix product, archived back in 2007. That's how deep this rabbit hole goes, friends.
(Please support the [Internet Archive!](https://archive.org/about/))
- **Make it look sweet in 2D.** This is not a cop-out. There is just no scene in the movies as iconic as the digital rain itself, and while depth effects are cool, they take away from these other details that make the difference between a goodtrix and a *greatrix*.
- **Make it look sweet in 3D, too.** This is not me caving to pressure! To facilitate future support of stereoscopic and holographic displays, it makes sense to nail down a 3D variation.
- **The 2D glyphs are in a *fixed grid* and *don't move*.** The "raindrops" we see in the 2D effect are changes in the brightness of symbols that occupy a column. To get a closer look at this, try setting the `fallSpeed` to a number close to 0.
- **Get the glow and color right.** Matrix symbols aren't just some shade of phosphorous green; they're first given a bloom effect, and then get tone-mapped to the green color palette.
- **Symbols change shape faster as they dim.** When symbols light up, they almost never change shape, but their cycle speed increases the darker and darker they get.
- **Two "raindrops" can occupy the same column.** This is complicated, because we can't allow them to collide. A useful approach to thinking about this is, each column's glyph brightness is a kind of [sawtooth wave](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/SawtoothWave.html).
- **Capture the glyph sequence.** Yes, the symbols in the sequels' opening titles, which are arguably the highest quality versions of the 2D effect, change according to a repeating sequence (see `glyph order.txt`).
- **Make it free, open source and web based.** Because someone could probably improve on what I've done, and I'd like to see that, and maybe incorporate their improvements back into this project.
- **Support as many browsers and devices as possible.** This project used to rely on Three.js's GPUComputationRenderer, which only worked in browsers supporting WebGL's [oes_texture_float extension](https://caniuse.com/#search=OES_texture_float). The rewrite dropped this dependency, and gained support for a broader range of browsers and devices.
- **Whip up some artistic license and depict the *previous* Matrix versions.** The sequels describe [a paradisiacal predecessor](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=paradise) to the Matrix that was too idyllic, [and another earlier, nightmarish Hobbesian version](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=nightmare) that proved too campy. They depict some programs running older, differently colored code, so it's time someone tried rendering them.
- **Heck, try building some homemade varieties that have nothing to do with the franchise.** See the list of links above for the full set of available versions.
- **Promote a progressive interpretation of the film franchise.** *The Matrix* is an action film you can enjoy without critical analysis, but if you do read into it, you'll be rewarded. And let's be clear: **The Matrix is a story about transitioning, directed by two siblings who transitioned**. This is undeniable. Its franchise has plenty more themes, and plenty of room for interpretation, but the widely known community of misogynists who claim this imagery for their movement cannot be tolerated in any form. This is a chance to open minds, not shut them.

---
### side note: other people's Matrix effects

The number of implementations out there of this effect is a testament to the size of the film's impact on popular culture. For decades, I've enjoyed searching for and comparing them from time to time. That's probably how you arrived here— it's _fun_ to see what kinds of solutions different people come up with to a problem, when the process is purely recreational and its success is subjective. I myself tried and failed to make the effect many times over.

Some of the [earliest](https://github.com/ppetr/xlockmore/blob/master/modes/matrix.c), [roughest](https://github.com/Zygo/xscreensaver/blob/d1f484cfa47f4a0862140421480bb536ad66ede9/hacks/xmatrix.c) versions were made after the film hit theaters in March, but before it was released on home media in October— people were recreating the effect purely from memory. Others probably used the official screensaver as a reference, which was made by the time-strappped developers of [the (excellent, defunct) official site](https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://whatisthematrix.com) from the images and multimedia tools they had available.

The fourth film in the franchise apparently comes out December 22, 2021. I'm anticipating new effects, and a flurry of new attempts at recreating them!

---
### customization

You can customize the digital rain quite a bit by stapling "URL variables" to its URL— by putting a '?' at the end of the link above, and then chaining together words, like this:

[https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?width=100&fallSpeed=-0.1&effect=none](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?width=100&fallSpeed=-0.1&effect=none)

Now you know link fu. Here's a list of customization options:

- **version** - the version of the Matrix to simulate. Can be "paradise", "nightmare", "operator" or "classic" (default).
  - "classic" is the Matrix code everyone knows and loves, mostly based on the sequels' opening title graphics.
  - "operator" is more reminiscent of the matrix code as it appears in the first movie's opening titles, and on operators' screens: flatter, crowded, without a gradient, and with occasional effects (such as a square ripple).
  - "paradise" is how the Matrix's idyllic predecessor may have appeared: warm, simplistic, encompassing.
  - "nightmare" is how the Matrix may have appeared in the Merovingian's heyday: flashy, foreboding, relentless.
- **width** - the number of columns (and rows) to draw. Default is 80.
- **volumetric** - when set to "true", this renders the glyphs with depth, slowly approaching the eye. Default is "false".
- **density** - the number of 3D raindrops to draw, proportional to the default. Default is 1.0.
- **forwardSpeed** - the rate that the 3D raindrops approach. Default is 1.0.
- **slant** - the angle that the 2D raindrops fall, in degrees. Default is 0.
- **bloomSize** - the glow quality, from 0 to 1. Default is 0.5. Lowering this value may help the digital rain run smoother on your device.
- **resolution** - the image size, relative to the window size. Default is 1. Lowering this value may improve your performance, especially on high pixel density displays.
- **raindropLength** - the vertical scale of "raindrops" in the columns. Can be any number, even negative! Default is 1.0.
- **animationSpeed** - the overall speed of the animation. Can be any number, even negative! Default is 1.0.
- **fallSpeed** - the speed of the rain. Can be any number, even negative! Default is 1.0.
- **cycleSpeed** - the speed that the glyphs change their symbol. Can be any number, even negative! Default is 1.0.
- **effect** - alternatives to the default post-processing effect. Can be "plain", "pride", "customStripes", "none", or "image".
  - ("none" displays the texture whose RGBA values represent the glyph shape and brightness data. _epilepsy warning_: lots of flickering)
- **colors** - if you set the effect to "customStripes", you can specify the colors of vertical stripes as alternating *R,G,B* numeric values, like so: [https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=customStripes&colors=1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,0](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=customStripes&colors=1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,0)
- **url** - if you set the effect to "image", this is how you specify which image to load. It doesn't work with any URL; I suggest grabbing them from Wikipedia: [https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=image&url=https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f5/EagleRock.jpg](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=image&url=https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f5/EagleRock.jpg)


---
### other details

The Coptic glyphs in the "Paradise Matrix" version are derived from [George Douros's font "Symbola"](http://users.teilar.gr/~g1951d), due to their similarity to the script in [CG II of Nag Hammadi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nag_Hammadi_Codex_II). If a 4th century Gnostic scribe trolled Athanasius over IRC, it might look like this.

The Gothic glyphs in the "Nightmare Matrix" version are derived from [Dr. jur. Robert Pfeffer's font "Silubur"](http://www.robert-pfeffer.net/gotica/englisch/index.html), which are inspired by the uncial script found in the [Codex Argenteus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codex_Argenteus). If a werewolf emailed a vampire in the 6th century, it might look like this.

The glyphs used in the "Palimpsest" and "Twilight" versions are derived from [Teague Chrystie's font "Huberfish"](http://robotsoup.com/huberfish.html), a fictitious alphabet that comes in several styles. If a spacedock technician bought a soda from a vending machine in an cool utopian future that will never happen, it might look like this.

The glyphs are formatted as a multi-channel distance field (or MSDF) via Victor Chlumsky's [msdfgen](https://github.com/Chlumsky/msdfgen). This format preserves the crisp edges and corners of vector graphics when rendered as textures. Chlumsky's thesis paper, which is in English and is also easy to read, is [available to download here](https://dspace.cvut.cz/handle/10467/62770).

The raindrops themselves are particles [computed on the GPU inside of a texture](https://threejs.org/examples/webgl_gpgpu_water.html), much smaller than the final render. The data sent from the CPU to the GPU every frame is negligible. That was a fun learning experience.

Commit message:

Moved looking glass context logic into an "lkgHelper" module. Fixed math issues.

README.md, after:

![Matrix screenshot](/screenshot.png?raw=true "Matrix's default appearance.")

# matrix (web-based green code rain, made with love)

### TL;DR

- [Classic Matrix code](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix)
- [3D mode](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?volumetric=true)
- [Holographic version](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=holoplay) (requires a Looking Glass display; see it in action [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gwA9hfq1Ing))
- [Matrix Resurrections code (WIP)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=resurrections)
- [Matrix Resurrections's updated code (WIP)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=updated)
- [Operator Matrix code (with ripple effects)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=operator)
- [Code of the "Nightmare Matrix"](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=nightmare)
  - [(you know, this stuff).](http://matrix.wikia.com/wiki/Nightmare_Matrix)
- [Code of the "Paradise Matrix"](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=paradise)
  - [(AKA this stuff).](http://matrix.wikia.com/wiki/Paradise_Matrix)
- [A custom variety I call "Palimpsest"](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=palimpsest)
- [A custom variety I call "Twilight"](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=twilight)
- [Pride flag colors](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=pride)
- [Trans flag colors](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=trans)
- [Custom stripes (`colors=R,G,B,R,G,B,R,G,B, etc`)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=customStripes&colors=1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,0)
- [Custom image (`url=www.website.com/picture.jpg`)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=image&url=https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f5/EagleRock.jpg)
- [Raw compute texture (`effect=none`) (_epilepsy warning_: lots of flickering)](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=none)

- [The free font (TrueType).](https://github.com/Rezmason/matrix/raw/master/assets/Matrix-Code.ttf)
---
### about

This project is a WebGL implementation of the raining green code seen in _The Matrix Trilogy_. It's built right on top of the upcoming graphics API [WebGPU](https://github.com/gpuweb/gpuweb), but falls back to the functional WebGL wrapper, [REGL](https://regl.party); its previous Three.js version is maintained in a separate branch.

---
### goals

The way I see it, there's four kinds of Matrix effects people call ["digital rain"](http://matrix.wikia.com/wiki/Matrix_code):
1. The green symbols that "rain down" operators' screens
2. Scenes from within the simulation that depict green symbols streaking across everything
3. The opening title graphics from *The Matrix*, which combine effect #1 with a "dialing" visualization and some other 3D effects
3. The sequels' opening title graphics, which combine aspects of effects #1 and #2.

While there have been a lot of attempts at #1 and #3, they're all missing important parts of #4 that make digital rain so iconic. Here are the requirements for my implementation:

- **Get the right glyphs**. Like the actual ones. Everyone knows Matrix glyphs are some treatment of [Katakana](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katakana), but they also include a few characters from [Susan Kare's Chicago typeface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicago_(typeface)). The Matrix glyphs in *this* project come from the source: cleaned up vectors [from an old SWF](https://web.archive.org/web/20070914173039/http://www.atari.com:80/thematrixpathofneo/) for an official Matrix product, archived back in 2007. That's how deep this rabbit hole goes, friends.
(Please support the [Internet Archive!](https://archive.org/about/))
- **Make it look sweet in 2D.** This is not a cop-out. There is just no scene in the movies as iconic as the digital rain itself, and while depth effects are cool, they take away from these other details that make the difference between a goodtrix and a *greatrix*.
- **Make it look sweet in 3D, too.** This is not me caving to pressure! To facilitate future support of stereoscopic and holographic displays, it makes sense to nail down a 3D variation.
- **The 2D glyphs are in a *fixed grid* and *don't move*.** The "raindrops" we see in the 2D effect are changes in the brightness of symbols that occupy a column. To get a closer look at this, try setting the `fallSpeed` to a number close to 0.
- **Get the glow and color right.** Matrix symbols aren't just some shade of phosphorous green; they're first given a bloom effect, and then get tone-mapped to the green color palette.
- **Symbols change shape faster as they dim.** When symbols light up, they almost never change shape, but their cycle speed increases the darker and darker they get.
- **Two "raindrops" can occupy the same column.** This is complicated, because we can't allow them to collide. A useful approach to thinking about this is, each column's glyph brightness is a kind of [sawtooth wave](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/SawtoothWave.html).
- **Capture the glyph sequence.** Yes, the symbols in the sequels' opening titles, which are arguably the highest quality versions of the 2D effect, change according to a repeating sequence (see `glyph order.txt`).
- **Make it free, open source and web based.** Because someone could probably improve on what I've done, and I'd like to see that, and maybe incorporate their improvements back into this project.
- **Support as many browsers and devices as possible.** This project used to rely on Three.js's GPUComputationRenderer, which only worked in browsers supporting WebGL's [oes_texture_float extension](https://caniuse.com/#search=OES_texture_float). The rewrite dropped this dependency, and gained support for a broader range of browsers and devices.
- **Whip up some artistic license and depict the *previous* Matrix versions.** The sequels describe [a paradisiacal predecessor](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=paradise) to the Matrix that was too idyllic, [and another earlier, nightmarish Hobbesian version](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix?version=nightmare) that proved too campy. They depict some programs running older, differently colored code, so it's time someone tried rendering them.
- **Heck, try building some homemade varieties that have nothing to do with the franchise.** See the list of links above for the full set of available versions.
- **Promote a progressive interpretation of the film franchise.** *The Matrix* is an action film you can enjoy without critical analysis, but if you do read into it, you'll be rewarded. And let's be clear: **The Matrix is a story about transitioning, directed by two siblings who transitioned**. This is undeniable. Its franchise has plenty more themes, and plenty of room for interpretation, but the widely known community of misogynists who claim this imagery for their movement cannot be tolerated in any form. This is a chance to open minds, not shut them.

---
### side note: other people's Matrix effects

The number of implementations out there of this effect is a testament to the size of the film's impact on popular culture. For decades, I've enjoyed searching for and comparing them from time to time. That's probably how you arrived here— it's _fun_ to see what kinds of solutions different people come up with to a problem, when the process is purely recreational and its success is subjective. I myself tried and failed to make the effect many times over.

Some of the [earliest](https://github.com/ppetr/xlockmore/blob/master/modes/matrix.c), [roughest](https://github.com/Zygo/xscreensaver/blob/d1f484cfa47f4a0862140421480bb536ad66ede9/hacks/xmatrix.c) versions were made after the film hit theaters in March, but before it was released on home media in October— people were recreating the effect purely from memory. Others probably used the official screensaver as a reference, which was made by the time-strappped developers of [the (excellent, defunct) official site](https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://whatisthematrix.com) from the images and multimedia tools they had available.

The fourth film in the franchise apparently comes out December 22, 2021. I'm anticipating new effects, and a flurry of new attempts at recreating them!

---
### customization

You can customize the digital rain quite a bit by stapling "URL variables" to its URL— by putting a '?' at the end of the link above, and then chaining together words, like this:

[https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?width=100&fallSpeed=-0.1&effect=none](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?width=100&fallSpeed=-0.1&effect=none)

Now you know link fu. Here's a list of customization options:

- **version** - the version of the Matrix to simulate. Can be "paradise", "nightmare", "operator" or "classic" (default).
  - "classic" is the Matrix code everyone knows and loves, mostly based on the sequels' opening title graphics.
  - "operator" is more reminiscent of the matrix code as it appears in the first movie's opening titles, and on operators' screens: flatter, crowded, without a gradient, and with occasional effects (such as a square ripple).
  - "paradise" is how the Matrix's idyllic predecessor may have appeared: warm, simplistic, encompassing.
  - "nightmare" is how the Matrix may have appeared in the Merovingian's heyday: flashy, foreboding, relentless.
- **width** - the number of columns (and rows) to draw. Default is 80.
- **volumetric** - when set to "true", this renders the glyphs with depth, slowly approaching the eye. Default is "false".
- **density** - the number of 3D raindrops to draw, proportional to the default. Default is 1.0.
- **forwardSpeed** - the rate that the 3D raindrops approach. Default is 1.0.
- **slant** - the angle that the 2D raindrops fall, in degrees. Default is 0.
- **bloomSize** - the glow quality, from 0 to 1. Default is 0.5. Lowering this value may help the digital rain run smoother on your device.
- **resolution** - the image size, relative to the window size. Default is 1. Lowering this value may improve your performance, especially on high pixel density displays.
- **raindropLength** - the vertical scale of "raindrops" in the columns. Can be any number, even negative! Default is 1.0.
- **animationSpeed** - the overall speed of the animation. Can be any number, even negative! Default is 1.0.
- **fallSpeed** - the speed of the rain. Can be any number, even negative! Default is 1.0.
- **cycleSpeed** - the speed that the glyphs change their symbol. Can be any number, even negative! Default is 1.0.
- **effect** - alternatives to the default post-processing effect. Can be "plain", "pride", "customStripes", "none", or "image".
  - ("none" displays the texture whose RGBA values represent the glyph shape and brightness data. _epilepsy warning_: lots of flickering)
- **colors** - if you set the effect to "customStripes", you can specify the colors of vertical stripes as alternating *R,G,B* numeric values, like so: [https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=customStripes&colors=1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,0](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=customStripes&colors=1,0,0,1,1,0,0,1,0)
- **url** - if you set the effect to "image", this is how you specify which image to load. It doesn't work with any URL; I suggest grabbing them from Wikipedia: [https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=image&url=https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f5/EagleRock.jpg](https://rezmason.github.io/matrix/?effect=image&url=https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/f/f5/EagleRock.jpg)


---
### other details

The Coptic glyphs in the "Paradise Matrix" version are derived from [George Douros's font "Symbola"](http://users.teilar.gr/~g1951d), due to their similarity to the script in [CG II of Nag Hammadi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nag_Hammadi_Codex_II). If a 4th century Gnostic scribe trolled Athanasius over IRC, it might look like this.

The Gothic glyphs in the "Nightmare Matrix" version are derived from [Dr. jur. Robert Pfeffer's font "Silubur"](http://www.robert-pfeffer.net/gotica/englisch/index.html), which are inspired by the uncial script found in the [Codex Argenteus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codex_Argenteus). If a werewolf emailed a vampire in the 6th century, it might look like this.

The glyphs used in the "Palimpsest" and "Twilight" versions are derived from [Teague Chrystie's font "Huberfish"](http://robotsoup.com/huberfish.html), a fictitious alphabet that comes in several styles. If a spacedock technician bought a soda from a vending machine in an cool utopian future that will never happen, it might look like this.

The glyphs are formatted as a multi-channel distance field (or MSDF) via Victor Chlumsky's [msdfgen](https://github.com/Chlumsky/msdfgen). This format preserves the crisp edges and corners of vector graphics when rendered as textures. Chlumsky's thesis paper, which is in English and is also easy to read, is [available to download here](https://dspace.cvut.cz/handle/10467/62770).

The raindrops themselves are particles [computed on the GPU inside of a texture](https://threejs.org/examples/webgl_gpgpu_water.html), much smaller than the final render. The data sent from the CPU to the GPU every frame is negligible. That was a fun learning experience.
